---
title: "3A Weston’s Way: Why The MBTA 3A Law Happened" 
description: "3A Weston’s Way: Why The MBTA 3A Law Happened"
date: 2025-09-15
categories: ["emails"]
authors: ["Alan Day"]
tags: ["MBTA 3A"]
draft: false
---
The short version is: Single family zoning is hampering the regional economy. 3A is the state's attempt to enable more housing creation closer to the jobs and increase the housing supply.

As the Boston regional economy and population grew, houses close to the jobs became ever more expensive because nearly every regional town defended its single family zoning approach and the only affordable single family homes were being built further and further away from the jobs. "Building up" (multifamily buildings) was stopped by most towns. Eventually the new affordable single family homes were so far away that the commute was intolerable to the commuter as well as very disruptive to the towns along the way to the jobs, like Weston. The value of homes closer to the jobs increased beyond the reach of too many people. Employees and jobs began to move away from the region because the cost of housing was better elsewhere. (see Paul Krugman's description of the "Limits of Sprawl" linked below)

Employee recruitment and retention issues is seriously hampering our economy, as described in the Mass Business Roundtable report linked below. Housing is by far the highest obstacle to business in Massachusetts.

Employers pressured the legislature to overcome the single family zoning bottleneck by mandating the creation of more housing within a reasonable commute to the jobs. The state estimating the region is short 220,000 housing units (see the state EOHLC Housing Plan link below), and the region’s employers are still finding it extremely difficult in a knowledge based economy to hire and retain people who have lots of choices around the country where to live and work. Employers expanded elsewhere and some relocated entirely. The vaunted Massachusetts economy based on smart people has slowed its growth and was at risk of serious deterioration.

During Governor Baker’s last term the legislature passed the MBTA 3A Multifamily law to try to overcome the single family zoning bottleneck to housing growth. The law mandates multifamily zoning in towns near public transportation to moderate the traffic impact of new housing in an effort to pave the way for more housing closer to the jobs. Weston would have less traffic if more housing was built east of us so commuters didn't need to transverse through our town. The people west of us wish we would do the same and build more housing east of them. Everyone wishes there was better public transportation to reduce traffic congestion.

This dynamic of the “limits to sprawl” described by Paul Krugman where single family zoning pushes affordable housing beyond the boundary of a tolerable commute, thus stopping economic growth, isn’t just a Boston problem. Atlanta, Austin, and every other growing city has experienced the same problem. Economist Paul Krugman describes the technology solution to housing as the elevator, building taller closer to the jobs instead of further away.

Many people, including us, understandably bristle at the state forcing towns to include multifamily housing in their towns, but in the end we have to answer the question of how does the state solve the housing crisis if not something like 3A? More housing is needed closer to the jobs and at prices most people can afford to keep the economy growing.  No one has yet proposed a better solution than 3A since towns have not and will not allow multifamily buildings on their own.

Some believe Weston does not need to participate in solving the regional housing crisis. It appears that the state government law enforcement officers and our courts disagree that some towns can avoid doing their part and that other towns will fill the gap. Given recent court decisions, our only choice in Weston is apparently to design a 3A plan that serves our town as best we can, or live with whatever the courts decide for us. 

In our opinion, Weston has designed a plan that is the best we could possibly get. We’ll describe its specific advantages and the legal situation in separate messages. Both our regional economy and Weston's ability to chose its own solution to the 3A issue is in our hands as voters.

#### We need to pass 3A on October 15
#### 3A Weston's Way 

More background reading:  
[Krugman article](https://paulkrugman.substack.com/p/the-limits-of-sprawl)  
[Massachusetts Business Roundtable Report](https://www.maroundtable.com/wp-content/uploads/2024/06/2024-MBR-MA-Talent-and-Workforce-Competitiveness-Survey-FINAL-VI.pdf)  
[Masschusetts Statewide Housing Plan](https://www.mass.gov/info-details/a-home-for-everyone-massachusetts-statewide-housing-plan)

